Issue Summary:
  On the 12th of August 2023, between 6:21pm to 7:30pm West Africa Time.
My Ubuntu software being hosted on a VMware Workstation suddenly freezes, without any
response from the system, I forced the host system off by holding down the machine's power 
button for a few seconds. After turning and on the machine again and running the
Ubuntu machine, I noticed a lack of network connectivity despite the fact that the host
system could access the internet. The problem is suspected to have risen from a
few missing kernel modules upon boot up, namely mod 'e1000e' and 'igb'.
  Being the sole user of the machine, I was the only one affected, however, this
is an issue that can affect anyone.

Timeline (all in West Africa Time on the 12th of August 2023):
*  6:21pm: Inability to access the internet detected.
*  6:21pm: Issue was detected when trying to deploy the static files of a website to
a couple ubuntu servers being hosted on the machine
*  6:25pm: Tried pinging www.google.com to test the network connection
*  6:30pm: Tried rebooting system, and noted a continued lack of network connectivity
*  6:45pm: Ran command 'sudo lshw -C network' to inspect the state of the network
*  6:50pm: Read recent kernel log messages using the 'dmesg' command
*  7:00pm: Found some modules missing were disabling the machine's ability to establish an internet connection
*  7:10pm: Used the 'modprobe' command to add the required modules
*  7:15pm: Requested network configuration information using dhclient
*  7:20pm: Rebooted system
*  7:30pm: System regains internet connectivity

Root cause and resolution:
  The issue arose after a forced shutdown of the machine after detecting a crash
that caused the machine to freeze all processes. Although unlikely, It seems to
be that a couple kernel modules were lost in the process, which reulted in a 
loss of network connectivity. The network showed a disabled status while troubleshooting.
Upon examining the kernel log information, the missing modules were noted and
the following commands were required to get the machine back in order.

  sudo modprobe e1000e
  sudo modprobe igb
  sudo dhclient ens33
  sudo reboot

Corrective and preventative measures must contain:
  Reducing machine load and allotting more memory to the virtual machine to
prevent future crashes.
  Choosing to properly shutdown the virtual machine would reduce the chances of corruption within the kernel, and as such problems like this could be prevented in its entirety.
